A former official of the quartermaster's department, retired collegiate secretary Lakhmatov, sat at his desk and, drinking his sixteenth glass, reflected on brotherhood, equality and freedom. Suddenly the devil looked out at him from behind the lamp… But don't be scared, reader. Do you know what the devil is? He is a young man of pleasant appearance, with a face as black as boots and red expressive eyes. Although he is not married, he has horns on his head… Hairstyle a la Capul. The body is covered with green fur and smells like a dog. There is a tail dangling at the bottom of the back, ending in an arrow… Claws instead of fingers, horse hooves instead of legs. Lakhmatov, seeing the devil, was somewhat confused, but then, remembering that green devils have a stupid habit of appearing to all tipsy people in general, he soon calmed down.
— Who do I have the honor to talk to? — he turned to the uninvited guest.
The devil was confused and lowered his eyes.
"Don't be shy,— Lakhmatov continued. — Come closer… I am a man without prejudice, and you can talk to me sincerely... to your liking… Who are you?
The devil hesitantly approached Lakhmatov and, tucking his tail under him, politely bowed.
"I'm the devil, or the devil..." he introduced himself. — I am an official of special assignments under the person of His Excellency the director of the infernal office of Mr. Satan!
— I heard, I heard… Very pleasant. Sit down! Would you like some vodka? Very glad… And what do you do?
Damn, I was even more confused…
"Actually, I don't have any specific classes..." he replied, coughing in embarrassment and blowing his nose into a Rebus. — Before, indeed, we had a lesson… We tempted people... seduced them from the path of good to the path of evil… Now this is an occupation, antr-nu-suadi1, and it's not worth spitting… There is no way of good anymore, there is nothing to seduce. And besides, people have become more cunning than us... if you please, tempt a man when he graduated from all sciences at the university, passed fire, water and copper pipes! How can I teach you to steal a ruble if you've already snatched thousands without my help?
— It is so… But, however, don't you do something?
— Yes... our former position can now only be a memorial one, but we still have a job... tempting cool ladies, pushing youngsters to write poetry, forcing drunken merchants to break mirrors… We have not interfered in politics, literature and science for a long time... We don't know a damn thing about it... Many of us cooperate in the "Rebus", there are even those who left hell and joined the people… These retired devils, who joined the people, married rich merchants and now live well. Some of them practice law, others publish newspapers, generally very sensible and respected people!
— Sorry for the indiscreet question: what kind of content do you receive?
"Our situation is the same, sir,— the devil replied. — The staff has not changed at all... the apartment, lighting and heating are still state-owned...they do not give us salaries, because we are all considered supernumeraries and because the devil is an honorary position… Generally,
Frankly speaking, life is bad, even if you go around the world… Thanks to the people who taught us how to take bribes, otherwise we would have been beaten a long time ago… We only live on income… You supply sinners with provisions, well... you grab... Satan has grown old, goes to see everything on Zucchini, he is not up to reporting now…
Lakhmatov poured the devil a glass of vodka. He drank and started talking. He told all the secrets of hell, poured out his soul, cried and liked Lakhmatov so much that he even left him to spend the night at his place. The devil slept in the stove and raved all night. By morning he was gone.
